A month after we moved to Eden Park, my mother brought home two cats. Black
cats. Beautiful creatures. Some woman from her work had a litter of kittens she
was trying to get rid of, and my mom ended up with two. I was excited because I’d
never had a pet before. My mom was excited because she loves animals. She didn’t
believe in any nonsense about cats. It was just another way in which she was a
rebel, refusing to conform to ideas about what black people did and didn’t do.
     In a black neighborhood, you wouldn’t dare own a cat, especially a black cat.
That would be like wearing a sign that said, “Hello, I am a witch.” That would be
suicide. Since we’d moved to a colored neighborhood, my mom thought the cats
would be okay. Once they were grown we let them out during the day to roam the
neighborhood. Then we came home one evening and found the cats strung up by
their tails from our front gate, gutted and skinned and bleeding out, their heads
chopped off. On our front wall someone had written in Afrikaans,
“Heks”—“Witch.”
     Colored people, apparently, were no more progressive than black people on
the issue of cats.
    I wasn’t exactly devastated about the cats. I don’t think we’d had them long
enough for me to get attached; I don’t even remember their names. And cats are
dicks for the most part. As much as I tried they never felt like real pets. They never
showed me affection nor did they accept any of mine. Had the cats made more of
an effort, I might have felt like I had lost something. But even as a kid, looking at
these dead, mutilated animals, I was like, “Well, there you have it. Maybe if they’d
been nicer, they could have avoided this.”
     After the cats were killed, we took a break from pets for a while. Then we got
dogs. Dogs are cool. Almost every black family I knew had a dog. No matter how
poor you were, you had a dog. White people treat dogs like children or members of
the family. Black people’s dogs are more for protection, a poor-man’s alarm
system. You buy a dog and you keep it out in the yard. Black people name dogs by
their traits. If it has stripes, you call it Tiger. If it’s vicious, you call it Danger. If it
has spots, you call it Spotty. Given the finite number of traits a dog can have,
pretty much everyone’s dogs have the same names; people just recycle them.
     We’d never had dogs in Soweto. Then one day some lady at my mom’s work
offered us two puppies. They weren’t planned puppies. This woman’s Maltese
poodle had been impregnated by the bull terrier from next door, a strange mix. My
mom said she’d take them both. She brought them home, and I was the happiest
kid on earth.